<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<title>Melancholia</title>
		<link href="css/page-template.xpgt" rel="page-template" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml" />
		<link href="css/stylesheetFCE.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>

<body epub:type="bodymatter" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
  <div xml:lang="en">
  <section epub:type="chapter">
    <h3><strong><br /><br />Melancholia</strong></h3>

    <p class="sinsangriai"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_9" title="9" />In recent years, the end of love has been announced many
times. Love, the claim goes, is foundering because of endless
freedom of choice, the overabundance of options, and
the compulsion for perfection. In a world of unlimited possibilities,
love itself represents an impossibility. Passion,
too, is said to have grown cold. Eva Illouz has traced this
state of affairs back to the rationalization of love and
expanding technologies of choice. However, this sociological
theory fails to recognize that another influence is now
underway, which is corroding love far more than endless
freedom or unlimited possibilities. The crisis of love does
not derive from too many <i>others</i> so much as from the erosion
of the <i>Other</i>. This erosion is occurring in all spheres of
life; its corollary is the mounting narcissification of the Self.
In fact, <i>the vanishing of the Other</i> is a dramatic process — even though, fatefully enough, it largely escapes notice.</p>

    <p class="texto">Eros concerns the Other in the strong sense, namely,
what cannot be encompassed by the regime of the ego.
Therefore, in the <i>inferno of the same</i>, which contemporary
society is increasingly becoming, erotic experience does
not exist. Erotic experience presumes the asymmetry and
exteriority of the Other. It is not by chance that Socrates
the lover is called <i>atopos</i>. The Other, whom I desire and
who fascinates me, is <i>placeless</i>. He or she is removed
from the language of sameness: “Being atopic, the Other
makes language indecisive: one cannot speak <i>of</i> the Other,
<i>about</i> the Other; every attribute is false, painful, erroneous,
awkward.”<a href="notes.xhtml#return1-1" id="note1"><sup>1</sup></a> 
Our contemporary culture of constant comparison
(<i>Ver-Gleichen</i>) leaves no room for the negativity
of what is <i>atopos</i>. We are constantly comparing one thing
to another, thereby flattening them into the <i>Same</i>, precisely
because we no longer experience the atopia of the
Other. The negativity of the atopic Other refuses consumption.
Therefore, the society of the consumer endeavors to
eliminate atopic otherness in favor of consumable —<i>heterotopic</i>— differences. In contrast to otherness, difference
is positive. Yet today, negativity is disappearing everywhere.
Everything is being flattened out into an object of
consumption.</p>


  </section>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
