<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<title>Melancholia</title>
		<link href="css/page-template.xpgt" rel="page-template" type="application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml" />
		<link href="css/stylesheetFCE.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
	</head>

<body epub:type="bodymatter" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
  <div xml:lang="en">
  <section epub:type="chapter">
    <h3><strong><br /><br />Melancholia</strong></h3>

    <p class="sinsangriai"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_9" title="9" />In recent years, the end of love has been announced many
times. Love, the claim goes, is foundering because of endless
freedom of choice, the overabundance of options, and
the compulsion for perfection. In a world of unlimited possibilities,
love itself represents an impossibility. Passion,
too, is said to have grown cold. Eva Illouz has traced this
state of affairs back to the rationalization of love and
expanding technologies of choice. However, this sociological
theory fails to recognize that another influence is now
underway, which is corroding love far more than endless
freedom or unlimited possibilities. The crisis of love does
not derive from too many <i>others</i> so much as from the erosion
of the <i>Other</i>. This erosion is occurring in all spheres of
life; its corollary is the mounting narcissification of the Self.
In fact, <i>the vanishing of the Other</i> is a dramatic process — even though, fatefully enough, it largely escapes notice.</p>

    <p class="texto">Eros concerns the Other in the strong sense, namely,
what cannot be encompassed by the regime of the ego.
Therefore, in the <i>inferno of the same</i>, which contemporary
society is increasingly becoming, erotic experience does
not exist. Erotic experience presumes the asymmetry and
exteriority of the Other. It is not by chance that Socrates
the lover is called <i>atopos</i>. The Other, whom I desire and
who fascinates me, is <i>placeless</i>. He or she is removed
from the language of sameness: “Being atopic, the Other
makes language indecisive: one cannot speak <i>of</i> the Other,
<i>about</i> the Other; every attribute is false, painful, erroneous,
awkward.”<a href="notes.xhtml#return1-1" id="note1"><sup>1</sup></a> 
Our contemporary culture of constant comparison
(<i>Ver-Gleichen</i>) leaves no room for the negativity
of what is <i>atopos</i>. We are constantly comparing one thing
to another, thereby flattening them into the <i>Same</i>, precisely
because we no longer experience the atopia of the
Other. The negativity of the atopic Other refuses consumption.
Therefore, the society of the consumer endeavors to
eliminate atopic otherness in favor of consumable —<i>heterotopic</i>— differences. In contrast to otherness, difference
is positive. Yet today, negativity is disappearing everywhere.
Everything is being flattened out into an object of
consumption.</p>

<p class="texto">Today, we live in an increasingly narcissistic society.
Libido is primarily invested in one’s own subjectivity. Narcissism
is not the same as self-love. The subject of selflove
draws a negative boundary between him- or herself
and the Other. The narcissistic subject, on the other hand,
never manages to set any clear boundaries. In consequence,
the border between the narcissist and the Other
becomes blurry. The world appears only as adumbrations
of the narcissist’s self, which is incapable of recognizing the
Other in his or her otherness — much less acknowledging
this otherness for what it is. Meaning can exist for the narcissistic
self only when it somehow catches sight of itself.
It wallows in its own shadow everywhere until it drowns — in itself.</p>

<p class="texto">Depression is a narcissistic malady. It derives from
overwrought, pathologically distorted self-reference. The
narcissistic-depressive subject has exhausted itself and
worn itself down. Without a world to inhabit, it has been
abandoned by the <i>Other</i>. Eros and depression are opposites.
Eros pulls the subject out of itself, toward the Other. Depression,
in contrast, plunges the subject into itself. Today’s narcissistic
“achievement-subject” seeks out success above all.
Finding success validates the One through the Other.
Thereby, the Other is robbed of otherness and degrades into
a mirror of the One — a mirror affirming the latter’s image.
This logic of recognition ensnares the narcissistic achievement-subject more deeply in the ego. The corollary is
success-induced depression: the depressive achievementsubject
sinks into, and suffocates in, itself. Eros, in contrast,
makes possible experience of the <i>Other’s</i> otherness, which
leads the One out of a narcissistic inferno. It sets into motion
freely willed <i>self-renunciation</i>, freely willed <i>self-evacuation</i>.
A singular process of <i>weakening</i> lays hold of the subject of
love — which, however, is accompanied by a feeling of
strength. This feeling is not the <i>achievement</i> of the One, but
the <i>gift of the Other</i>.</p>  

<p class="texto">In the inferno of the same, the arrival of the atopic Other
can assume apocalyptic form. In other words: today, only an
apocalypse can liberate—indeed, redeem—us from the
inferno of the same, and lead us toward the Other. Thus,
Lars von Trier’s <i>Melancholia</i> begins with the announcement
of an apocalyptic, disastrous event. “Disaster” literally
means “unlucky star” (<i>desastrum</i>, in Latin). On her sister’s
estate, Justine stares into the night sky and sees a reddish
glow, which later proves to be a starless planet headed for
earth. This heavenly body, “Melancholia,” is a <i>desastrum</i>,
which sets fatality in motion. At the same time, however, it
is a <i>negative</i>, emanating a healing, cleansing effect. The
name “Melancholia” is paradoxical insofar as this planet
heals the depression that has taken the shape of a particular
form of melancholy. It manifests itself as the atopic Other,
which tears Justine out of the swamp of narcissism. She
experiences a veritable blossoming under the influence of
the death-bringing planet.</p>

<p class="texto"><i>Eros conquers depression</i>. The tense relationship
between love and depression commands the cinematic discourse
of <i>Melancholia</i> from the film’s inception. The prelude
from <i>Tristan und Isolde</i>, which frames the film musically,
invokes the power of love. Depression represents the
impossibility of love. Alternatively, it is the impossibility of
love that has led to depression. Only the planet Melancholia,
the atopic Other breaking into the inferno of the same,
arouses erotic desire in Justine. The nude scene, at the
rocks on the river’s edge, presents the body of a lover, aglow
with sensuality. Eagerly, Justine writhes in the blue light of
the heavenly body that is bringing death. The scene intimates
that Justine in fact desires deadly collision with the
atopic, wandering planet. She awaits approaching catastrophe
as joyous union with her beloved. Inevitably, Isolde’s
<i>Liebestod</i> comes to mind. As death draws near, Isolde also
yields lustfully to “the World-breath’s wafting universe” (<i>des
Welt-Atems wehendem All</i>).<a href="notes.xhtml#return1-2" id="note2"><sup>2</sup></a> 
It is no coincidence that
precisely this scene —the only erotic sequence in the entire
film— features the prelude from <i>Tristan und Isolde</i> again.
Magically, it invokes the proximity of eros and death, apocalypse
and deliverance.</p>

<p class="texto">Paradoxically, the approach of death animates Justine.
It opens her to the Other. Liberated from narcissistic captivity,
Justine also devotes caring attention to her sister and
her sister’s son. The film’s real magic lies in Justine’s miraculous
transformation from a depressive into a lover. Thus
the atopia of the Other turns out to be the utopia of eros.
Cannily, the director uses well-known classical paintings to
steer the film discursively and reinforce a particular symbolism.
Thus, in the surrealistic opening sequence, he fades in
Pieter Bruegel’s <i>The Hunters in the Snow</i> to induce deep,
wintry melancholy in the viewer. In the background, the
landscape borders the water — like Claire’s estate, which
blends into Bruegel’s painting. Both scenes display a similar
topology, as the wintry melancholy of <i>Hunters in the Snow</i>
extends to the world of the characters. The hunters trudge
homeward, downcast and in dark attire. The blackbirds in
the trees make the winter landscape even gloomier. The
sign of the inn, displaying the image of a saint, hangs at an
angle and is almost falling down. Then, black flakes fall
slowly from the sky, consuming the picture like a fire. This
melancholy winter landscape is followed by a scene that
resembles a painting; here, Justine is presented in the style
of John Everett Millais: with a wreath of flowers in hand, she
floats on the water like the lovely Ophelia.</p>

<p class="texto">After an argument with Claire, Justine succumbs to
despair once more; her helpless gaze wanders over abstract
paintings by Malevich in books lying open on a shelf. In a fit
of rage, she tears the books down, then replaces them with
other pictures portraying unfathomable human passions.
Just at this moment, the prelude from <i>Tristan und Isolde</i>
sounds forth again. Once more, it is a matter of love, desire,
and death. The first image Justine reaches for is Bruegel’s
<i>Hunters in the Snow</i>. Then she grabs a volume of Millais
with the painting of Ophelia — followed by Caravaggio’s
<i>David with the Head of Goliath</i>, Bruegel’s <i>The Land of Cockaigne</i>,
and, finally, a drawing by Carl Fredrik Hill depicting a
forlorn, baying stag.</p>

<p class="texto">The lovely Ophelia drifting in the water with her mouth
half open —her gaze lost in the beyond, like a saint or a
lover— points to the proximity of eros and death yet again.
Hamlet’s beloved dies surrounded by fallen flowers, singing
like a siren, Shakespeare writes. Ophelia dies a beautiful
death, a <i>Liebestod</i>. Millais’s painting shows a flower that
Shakespeare does not mention: a red poppy, which signifies
eros, dreams, and intoxication. Caravaggio’s <i>David with the
Head of Goliath</i> is also an image of death and desire. In contrast,
Bruegel’s <i>Land of Cockaigne</i> depicts an overstuffed
society of positivity — an inferno of the same. Here, the
swollen figures lie about apathetically, exhausted by satiety:
even the cactus has no thorns; it is made of bread. Everything
is positive inasmuch as it is edible and consumable.
This gorged company resembles the morbid wedding party
earlier in the film. Tellingly, Justine places Bruegel’s <i>Land of
Cockaigne</i> next to an illustration by William Blake, which
depicts a slave suspended by the ribs, but still alive. Here,
the invisible violence of positivity stands opposed to the
brutal power of negativity, which exploits and robs. Justine
leaves the library immediately after opening a book to Hill’s
picture of the stag and placing it on the shelf; the image
stands for the erotic desire, or yearning for love, that she
feels. Clearly, Lars von Trier knew that Carl Fredrik Hill suffered
from psychosis and depression. This sequence of
images illustrates the discourse of the film as a whole.
Eros —erotic desire— conquers depression. It delivers us
from the inferno of the same to the atopia, indeed the utopia,
of the wholly Other.</p>

<p class="texto">In <i>Melancholia</i>, the apocalyptic sky resembles the
empty firmament that Maurice Blanchot makes the primal
scene of his childhood. It reveals the atopia of the wholly
Other by suddenly interrupting the Same:</p>

<p class="textoSangi"><br />Suppose this: the child —is he seven years old, or eight
perhaps?— standing by the window, drawing the curtain
and, through the pane, looking…</p>

<p class="textoSang">What happens then: the sky, the same sky suddenly
open, absolutely black and absolutely empty,
revealing… such an absence that all has since always
and forevermore been lost… — …the vertiginous
knowledge that nothing is what there is, and first of all
nothing beyond. The unexpected… is the feeling of happiness
that straightaway submerges the child, the ravaging
joy to which he can bear witness only by tears,
and endless flood of tears… He says nothing. He will
live henceforth in the secret. He will weep no more.<a href="notes.xhtml#return1-3" id="note3"><sup>3</sup></a> 

<p class="texto"><br />The child Blanchot describes is enraptured by the infinity of
the barren sky, torn out of himself and emptied (<i>entinnerlicht</i>)
into an atopic Outside, dissolved and drained. The
disastrous event (<i>Ereignis</i>) —this invasion of the Exterior
and wholly Other— unfolds as dispossession (<i>Ent-Eignis</i>),
an annulment and voiding of the Own; that is, it unfolds as
death: “the sky’s emptiness: <i>the disaster as withdrawal outside
the sidereal abode</i>.”<a href="notes.xhtml#return1-4" id="note4"><sup>4</sup></a>  And yet, disaster fills the child with
“ravaging joy” — indeed, with the happiness of absence.
Herein lies the dialectic of the disaster, which also structures
<i>Melancholia</i>. Catastrophic fatality abruptly switches
over into salvation.</p>
  </section>
  </div>
</body>
</html>
